Let's take another step forward towards understanding the concept of
variability and we'll continue using our trusty deck of playing cards
for our example.
Variability, also known as dispersion, refers to how spread out
or closely clustered a set of values are in a data set.
There are several ways to measure this
but we'll focus on three main ones:
range, variance and standard deviation.
And standard deviation is a statistic that is reported very often.
It is the most popular measure of variability that is reported
Let's draw 5 cards again.
Suppose we got a 2, a 4, a 6, an 8 and a King
(which we know counts as 13).
The range is the simplest measure of variability.
It's the difference between the highest and the lowest values
in our dataset.
So in our case, if we subtract 2 from 13, we get a range of 11.
Now let's look at a dataset of numbers,
and plot the points on a numberline.
Let's do the same with another set of numbers.
For both of these datasets, the average is 5.
But we can see that the way the numbers are dispersed
are different in each set, they vary between themselves.
We can draw smoother lines using statistical software
that visually displays this difference.
We can see that they are shaped differently.
So let's explore this difference, and let's move to a slightly
more complex measure.
Variance tells us how much our data diverges from the mean.
To find it, we calculate the average of the squared differences
from the mean.
Don't worry about the calculations too much,
we want to focus on the underlying concepts.
But if you are curious about the math, the next segment
will briefly go over the calculations once more.
The important thing to note is that they build upon
the concepts you learned at the beginning of the video.
Here are the calculations once more.
We first find the average of the card numbers;
this gives us a mean of 6.6.
After that, we take the difference between each cards value
and the mean, which we calculated to be 6.6,
then we square these differences.
Once we have our squared differences, we add them up
and finally divide by the number of data points.
In other words, the total amount of cards which is 5.
This gives us the variance.
Finally we come to the standard deviation.
to get the standard deviation, all we have to do
is simply take the square root of the variance.
So, with range, variance, and standard deviation,
we get a clearer picture of our data.
Not just where the middle is, but also
how much our data tends to deviate from that middle.
Together with the measures of central tendency,
these are powerful tools for understanding our data.